Study Design, Data Collection, and Analysis
This chapter begins with an overview of the National Children’s Study (NCS) design. It then describes, critiques, and makes recommendations on sampling design and data collection plans and their impact on quality control and response burden. Finally, data analysis and dissemination plans developed for the NCS are described and recommendations provided for improvement.

Go to:
DESIGN SUMMARY
The NCS is designed as a longitudinal investigation of a nationally representative sample of 100,000 births to residents in the United States during the years 2008-2012. The births selected for the NCS will be identified from a probability sample of households chosen with standard survey sampling techniques. A sample cohort of births will be identified from a sample of all noninstitutionalized and cognitively/mentally competent women ages 18-44 who currently live in the national sample of households. The children born to these women during the recruitment period will in turn be followed until they are 21 years old. A variety of physical examinations and interview surveys, conducted in person and by telephone, will be completed during the follow-up period.

The NCS birth cohort will be identified from a stratified cluster sample of households chosen in two or more stages (or selection steps), with random selection used in each stage and the number of stages depending on the pattern of housing in the particular parts of the country that are selected.1 Some key features of the NCS sample design are presented in Table 4-1. The use of established random selection methods in each sampling stage will ensure that the NCS samples of households, eligible women of childbearing age, and births are national probability samples.

TABLE 4-1. Key Features of the Sample Design for the National Children’s Study.
TABLE 4-1
Key Features of the Sample Design for the National Children’s Study.

In the first stage, 110 individual counties or small groups of contiguous counties were randomly chosen (by staff at a federal agency partner, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/National Center for Health Statistics) to serve as the set of primary sampling units (PSUs). Each of these PSUs was selected with probability proportional to size (PPS), with the actual 1999-2002 count of live births serving as the measure of size for each PSU. Since multiple PSUs were chosen in some of the largest metropolitan areas, the 110 PSUs are found in 105 different “study locations or sites.” Fieldwork will begin in two waves (in 2009 and 2011) on random subsets of the remaining 98 study locations (the Vanguard Centers will undertake sampling, participant enrollment, and data collection in selected PSUs beginning in mid-2008). Within each sample PSU, 10-15 small groups of neighboring census blocks or block groups, called “segments,” are to be randomly chosen. All children born to all eligible female residents of all households located in the 1,100-1,650 sample segments will be included in the study, implying that no subsampling is to be done within sample segments. To improve the efficiency of screening for pregnancies among the women ages 18-44 who are identified in selected households, women who are more likely to become pregnant will be monitored more intensively than the other women. These women may also be recruited through the health care providers they visit during pregnancy and delivery.

Data collection and other survey process activities are to be completed using a common National Institutes of Health organizational structure, in which direct governance is provided by program staff of the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) to a network of centers tied to multiple study locations and a coordinating center, all of which are separately answerable to NICHD. A contract to serve as NCS coordinating center has already been awarded to Westat, Inc., of Rockville, Maryland, as have contracts to 24 centers, including the seven Vanguard Centers. NICHD anticipates the need for about 13 to 15 additional centers.

Developed within this organizational framework, the field operations plan prepared by Westat includes some elements of standardization and central process control but also the potential for independent local process accountability, since separate contracts would be negotiated by the centers that would conduct the fieldwork in the 105 study locations. Westat’s overall responsibility is to integrate its specific process tasks with those done by the other centers. This means that in addition to assuming responsibility for survey instrument development, field staff training, and subsequent sampling activity, Westat must plan and orchestrate all activities surrounding sample recruitment and retention, as well as the collection, processing, and analysis of all data that are obtained during the life of the study. Its coordinating role will require the methods and materials it develops to be incorporated into a written manual of operations. Finally, Westat must also see that all of these activities are completed efficiently, with high quality, and in a timely manner. The general responsibility of individual centers will be to appropriately and effectively apply the methods and use the materials that Westat develops.

Go to:
SAMPLING DESIGN
NCS sample selection follows well-established principles of population sampling. The most important feature is the strong commitment to random sampling methods in all stages of selection, combined with an effective use of sampling stratification selection with PPS selection in the first sampling stage. This approach is designed to ensure that the initial sample of births will be nationally representative. The extent to which the final data set is representative, of course, will depend on the study team’s success in maintaining the statistical integrity of the sample through a prolonged period of follow-up, as noted below. Another critical sampling feature is the use of the same approach (i.e., complete enumeration of a random sample of segments) in each sample PSU. Allowing individual centers to develop their own sampling methods within PSUs could have made analysis of NCS data unnecessarily complex and created the possibility that within-PSU sampling methods were incompatible or inappropriate.

Conclusion 4-1: We strongly endorse the use of probability sampling to select the NCS national sample of births.
